This is Deborah Beale, and I am interviewing Dr. W.
Arthur Porter on the history of Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 8th, 1984.
What I'd like to start with is just a brief
biographical sketch of you and how you came to be
associated with A&M and Peace. Oh, okay. Brief or
long, whatever you want to make it. Uh...
My association
with A&M began in 1968 as an assistant professor of
local engineering coming here from the
semiconductor and R&D labs in Texas. And you had a
degree in electrical engineering? No, I had
degrees in physics, a bachelor's and a master's
from North Texas, which I got
63 and 64 maybe. I have to check the masters. I think
the masters were 64. Then I came
to Texas
A&M
for a Ph.D. in physics in 64. I finished the
coursework for my Ph.D. in physics in 66. In those
two years from 64 to 66 when I taught as an
instructor in both the physics and math
departments
during those two years, decided
that I had been in the educational mode the moment I
left Texas A&M. I went to Texas A&M. R&D lab. Now,
the bio that I saw, you said you had the PhD in
interdisciplinary engineering. Correct. What
is that? That's
a degree that's not used very often here at A&M, but
it has been on the books. And there is not a
department of engineering here. The department
head rotates.
without any periodicity. I think it's random.
From various departments.
I don't know how many degrees of
interdisciplinary engineering have been given
at Texas A&M. It would be interesting to know that.
It's in the catalog. It's an option. But it's
usually reserved for someone who has had
I think my situation was a good example. I had
completed the coursework for a Ph.D. in physics. I
had spent two years in a major industrial research
laboratory. I had a very specific dissertation
research project that I was interested in doing.
And the coursework built around that discipline
was very interdisciplinary. It required an
understanding of the basic laws of Mother Nature
from the physical sense, which I had already done
in my PhD work in physics. It also demanded an
understanding of the applications of those laws
in several different areas of engineering, in
electrical, chemical,
materials.
So in 68, when I returned, when I really came to
Texas A&M as a professor for the first time, having
been a graduate student for two years before, I
defined what I wanted to do to finish my PhD. And it
was suggested that what I needed to do was to do the
interdisciplinary
engineering degree. I looked at it. It sounded
reasonable to me. So I did it. That I finished in
1970. So really all I did was build on the
experiences, educational experiences in
physics by adding courses in electrical
engineering at the Ph.D. level,
mechanics and materials, in chemical
engineering and gas dynamics,
did what we might otherwise call a Ph.D. and a half
or two Ph.D.s at a court work. And then did my
dissertation. And all of that time I was serving as
an assistant
professor. And the association that you used to
associate as a researcher at that time? Sure. The
research course at that time, that was in 68 to 70,
The electrical engineering department, which
also served as a division of teams, had very little
research and was trying to build its first
microelectronics program. I believe that was
what I was recruited from TI to do. The question I
was asked, I remember it well, And even how I came to
come back was I was here at A&M on campus recruiting
North Texas instructors. When I was asked to come
over to the electrical engineering department to
meet with some of the professors to advise them on
how to spend $50,000 of TEAS money they had been
given to start a microelectronics research
group. And so I met with him one afternoon, an
afternoon when the interviewing was slow. And
that evening, the head of the department, Bill
Jones, asked me if I would consider coming as a
member of the faculty, which I turned down. And it
was about three or four months later, after he
continued to contact me about would you do this or
would you do that, and kept saying, would you come
and join us? But I finally decided that if I was
going to finish my Ph.D., that would be about as
optimal a way as I was going to run into it. I was
working on it, still in physics, at night at North
Texas State. And I'm trying to do that for
Dallas. It's tough. So...
It was... June of 68, I decided to leave TI. I took a
leave. I just took a leave. You were just going to
set it up and go back? I was just going to set it up,
finish my PhD, and go back
to TI. And then in 70, when I finished my PhD and we
had the lab set up, I had written a proposal to NASA
for a research conference. which almost
coincided with the granting of my degree. The very
first research contract in electrical
engineering was awarded to me. Here at A&M? From
NASA. And so then I was faced with the decision of
whether to stay at A&M.
Was there a research contract that was awarded to
you? Yes. So it couldn't be passed on? That's
right. I had written the proposal. This was to the
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville,
Alabama.
Looking at the potential advantages.
There were two thrusts of the contract, as I recall
it. One was to try to establish concretely the
effects of processing these defects, those
defects that are induced during the process of
building an integrated circuit, or the yield and
reliability of the circuit. And my dissertation,
what I had gotten interested in at Temple Central
was a technique for controlling, preventing, And
then the potential advantages of going to space to
build the semiconductor integrated circuit
devices to avoid those effects. So that's kind of
the two career paths we crossed. There was an
intersection at the time of my graduation,
completion of my Ph.D. The NASA contract was
awarded. The option to go back to Texas estimates
was there. And Texas A&M was saying, don't go. So
all of that was,
it turned out to be an economically down The
final decision was TI asked me to stay on leave if I
wasn't going to return.
As long as I was staying at Texas A&M, TI was
satisfied. Fred Busey had called me He was then the
vice president of TI, in charge of the Civic Energy
Division. He said, do me one favor, if you leave
Texas A&M, do not take another industrial job
without letting me know
about it. But as long as I was willing to stay at A&M,
and work on the national research contract and
continue to build the research program here. They
were quite comfortable with me staying on leave
from PI and staying at A&M. And that's ultimately
what I did. And I stayed on leave from PI until
somewhere in the mid-70s when I finally decided I
wasn't going to go back. So you were the first
director of the Institute of Solid State? No. How
did that get set up? There were five or six of us in
electrical engineering that loosely formed what
you'd have to call the solid state
microelectronics group, or faculty. The
decision was made in the department that if we had
an institute, a formal institute,
administratively structured that the
visibility that we would present to the outside
world would be better and that we could compete
more effectively for research contracts and
graduate students
and so forth. So the decision was made, Boolean
Tees, with Bill Jones, who was head of the
department in the division of Tees, to create the
institute.
And that was made,
I believe, prior to even my
completion. I'm not sure. Very, very close to the
time. I've had to look at it. At the time, it seemed
just exactly what was written. But Roman Hayden
was the first director of ISSE, of the Institute
for Solid State Electronics. And he served as the
director until I took over. And I don't even
remember. 72. 72? Okay. So the Institute, the
Solid State Institute, or the Institute for Solid
State Electronics, was probably created about
70. I'm guessing. You may know that or not. Yeah.
We enrolled and took the... When he left Texas A&M
to become the chairman of the W department, I think
at Oklahoma, he now serves as the dean of
engineering at Arizona State. I don't know where
he is now. I'm not sure where he went, but he left.
And I was asked to take over the directorship of the
Institute for Scholarly Studies at Clarkson. I
was the second director. Did that take much of the
administrative work? Initially,
Well, nothing like this job. We were about five
faculty members. Probably no more than five
graduate
students. Maybe 10, but I don't believe there were
any at the PhD level. All at the master's level.
Might have been one in there somewhere at the PhD
level. But very small. So the administrative work
that it took on my part was just trying to structure
and define and give visibility to an entity that
was a mental creation that was in the process of
being physically structured. But see, we were
still putting all this together over an old bolted
wall. We were trying to build out of two-by-fours
and sheet-like, what you'd call a high-tech
research object. When
did you get out of there? When the Zachary
Engineering Center was completed, we moved from
Baltimore to Zachary. And I think Zachary must be
about 12 years old now. That would
have been about 70. No, Zachary must not be. He must
have been. 74 or somewhere like that. Yeah, well,
whatever that is, when we moved and we had
designed, been able to design into Zachary,
really some first class facilities. Is that the
way Zachary was constructed, or was every
department and institute got to design its own?
Well, not every, but all of those that were in
there. I think there were five. But I mean, all the
ones that were going to move in got to design their
own? That's right. So it wasn't an outside effort
to... No, that's right. As a matter of fact,
The person who really designed the facility,
the institute, was Robert Hayden. He was the
interface person. Did your involvement with TEAS
change? I know it did change between 72 and 79.
Well,
as ISSE
grew, the amount
of administrative work, we were, at the time, I was
asked to come in to tease. to become the director of
TV. That was in, actually it
was in August of 79. Yeah. Okay, so as director or as
assistant director? Well, I was asked to come as
the director, but the evolution of that was to be
the assistant director for a few months, and then
in the spring of 80, take over as director. But to
serve as the assistant director,
find where the restroom is and kind of get your feet
on the ground for a few months and then become the
director. And that proposal was made to me.
Actually
in August of 1979.
I
remember it well because I was just about to leave
on a trip to the PNC. There were eight or ten of us
local engineers from around the nation who had
been invited by China to come and give lectures
throughout the country. We were going to spend
about a month And about two weeks before I was to
leave, I was called out by the dean of the College of
Engineering and director of TEJ,
Fred Benson, and presented with his proposal. So
did you get to go to the PRC? Oh, sure. Okay. They
didn't make you? But I was asked to make my mind up.
or whether or not I would accept the position so
that it would become effective
on the 1st of September. Which really gave me
something like two weeks. It was somewhere around
the middle of August. So this wasn't a job you did or
made or got after this was just passed up? No, and it
came completely off the wall to me. It was the
second time I arrived in approach to the Indian
system to take on a major administrative
responsibility. What was the position? As
president of the Research Foundation, which
had...
Wasn't he, didn't Benson have that position then?
He may have had that position then, too. But when J.
Llewellyn, Dr. Llewellyn, had left as the
president of the Research Foundation, I
was
approached to take over that position. And I had
turned that day home. And so, after Intensive
meetings
with the president
of the university, who was at that time George
Miller, and the new dean of engineering, who at
that time was Bob Page, to get their sense of
whether or not it was the right move for me to leave
the directorship of this union. take
on the Directorship of Tees,
Vis-a-Vis, coming in as Assistant Director for a
few months and then going into the Directorship.
With their encouragement to do it, I agreed to it.
And then I went to China. Did you, was your
experience before then limited to ISSE or had you
gotten into any of the other TEAS programs and
research groups? Oh, at that time, of course by
that time ISSE had grown into a much more
substantive and definable research entity,
which was taken considerable amount of my time. As
a matter of fact, it was to the point where I had
really very little time to spend in the laboratory
myself. I sat right next to it. Graduate students
were essentially the hands and legs of the work in
the laboratory. But that change was pretty
dramatic. When was it, 72, did you say? From 72 to
79, that seven-year period,
a lot of the
nuts and bolts of literally installing the
equipment, I had done myself. And many, many of the
measurements, the experiments, not just their
design and the strategy of how to carry them out and
the analysis of the results, but the actual
carrying out of the experiments I had done myself.
Because we were building for nothing. No space, no
facilities, no equipment, no students. As they
say, no nothing. And so it was...
tracking from 68 particularly to 70, that 11 year
period, we had come from, and starting with me, how
would you spend $50,000 to get started if you had
it? Was it $50,000 in Teesman or was it Grant? No,
Teesman. But Tease had put $50,000, but sitting
here today talking about that is a joke. It's
funny. At the time, in 1968, for $50,000, you could
buy a respectable amount of equipment, which we
did, enough to get started. Well, we bought, I
think, four furnaces. a very fine microscope
and the basic photolithographic equipment to
have a dark room. You could buy one furnace
today for $50,000.
The laboratory over there is worth probably well
in excess of $5 million.
It may be more than that. It's probably closer to
$10,000 to $20,000. There are two laser systems
over
there that are worth half a million dollars each.
Is it
ever an interdisciplinary program? It was
confined. Its target was to support the research
and graduate education. in the microelectronics
area and we had selected the engineering
from a search point associated with the actual
fabrication manufacturing of the integrated
circuit so really it was the device physics and so
we were had built a strong group associated with
the the really front end part of the process as
opposed to the circuit design part of the process.
And that was a conscious decision because the
major universities that had to jump on Texas A&M,
places like Stanford, Cal Berkeley, had already
staked out a pretty substantial claim in the
circuit design, but there wasn't any university
really targeting
its efforts on studying the device physics
aspects associated
with building the head-right circuit. So that's
where we focused our attention. Is there any work
done with the remote sensing center, or is that
fairly different? The remote sensing center was
leaked also to the electrical engineering
division. And because of the natural colleague
relationship, the head of the remote sensing
center was John Rouse, who, as a matter of fact,
came to Texas A&M at the same time I did, in 1968.
He's now the dean of engineering at UT Arlington
and serving as head of the division of T's, as a
matter of fact. So
we had regular communication just because we were
professors in the same department. And we would
work jointly on research projects where the
expertise of ISSE and the remote sensing center
could be combined. So in that sense, I think all of
our research programs here are
interdisciplinary in nature. We work with the
physics department, with the chemistry
department, regularly. When our resources, our
capabilities, our facilities could supply a need
or satisfy a need, we always were open. We worked
with the nuclear engineering, still do. ISI has a
number of interrelationships,
interdisciplinary activities where it is
supportive of other programs and other programs
support itself. Did that flexibility
ever change when the administrative changes,
either as Chancellor or President? No, I don't
think so. That flexibility,
the flexibility to do it? No, because it's a
program in the Engineering Interim Station, and
the Engineering Interim Station is kind of a
melting pot of interdisciplinary activities. I
don't think that there's never been a
disincentive from the engineering
experiment station's point of view. No,
I don't believe there's ever been any
administrator that I've known at least or that
I've known if he's had or she that desire. It's not
been evident to me. The strength, in my opinion,
and I think this is shared by all of us in higher
education, what happens, although none of us
understand it, but what happens in a university
atmosphere and a university campus comes from
getting out of people's way and letting creative
minds work together. And if you start trying to
edict a person in a narrow otherwise narrowly
defined discipline can never go over and interact
with a person in a different but narrowly defined
discipline i think that would be suicide to what i
think happens in an academic but no one's ever
tried it it has been tried at other places no one's
no no no one's come in and tried to mark up the works i
wouldn't say that i i won't say that All I can say is
that I don't know of anybody who consciously tried
to do that. Now,
anytime you reorganize a place, and this place
does it regularly, I think it's constantly
undergoing re-organization,
the desire on almost all of our hearts to, what I
would say, control your own destiny,
Most of us, particularly in higher education, we
are in higher education in a collection of big
egos, generally talented people, bright people
who have a desire to make a contribution and hence a
desire to make their own contribution and have
that recognized. And that's the ego part. And
that's very desirable, I think. So to the extent
that any kind of administrative structure is
perceived, whether it is in point of fact or not, or
might have been, or might have worked, if given the
chance, If it is perceived by an individual to
interfere with that person's, much less entity of
a department or an institute or a division,
ability or right to control their own destiny,
then that perception will
cause problems. come to rest at the
administration's
doorstep. Has there been any particularly
low-part point in the peace history since you've
been involved with it? Oh,
yes, absolutely. Well, I don't say that they had to
turn around and evaluate themselves, but between
the time I agreed to become the director of TEES in
late August of 79,
and at that time, The system organization
structure was, TEAS was reporting to the
president of Texas A&M University. Fred Benson
was the vice president for engineering and
non-renewable resources,
if I recall the time. And TEAS reported to the
president through that vice president.
I was gone for a little over a month actually. I was
given a paper in a conference in Germany.
At any rate, by the time I got back from China,
the reorganization of the system was underway.
Unknown to me. And I found myself in the mode of
having been, quote, ordained the director to be of
needs of a part of the system that was finding
itself now
structured differently in the AM system than
it was. I had no... way, really, to judge what that
meant, what it might mean, or what it might be
perceived to mean. But it was a very traumatic
period for the system. All I had to do was be a casual
observer. And so, I would say the whole period of my
directorship has been rather interesting, from
this administrative organization, or
reorganization, and the perception
of what that means.
How does it turn out to be perceived? It depends
upon the eyes of the holder. It's like a painting.
My personal philosophy is that you can draw lines
on paper and say this office reports to this office
and this office interacts with this office And
about the best you can do with all of that is make it
difficult for it to work. But if you've got people
with common objectives, you cannot structure
a place. You'd have to work so hard, consciously,
to destroy it, to overcome the desire and will of
those people, regardless of where you placed them
and how you drew the lines. They're going to get the
job done. I do think you can organize a place,
however, to
simplify
how those good people can get the job done. But it's
virtually impossible if you really have good,
dedicated people with common values to start
with. So is the TEAS reorganization a part of the
whole system reorganization that took place?
Yes, that's right. So you were going through the
same threads everyone else was going through? Oh,
you bet. And I really had no idea personally what
all that meant. What was clear, it was resisted by
the university, Texas A&M University, did not
want to see the engineering experiment station
moved out from under the chain of command of the
university.
It was the will of the board to have the system
reorganized. And the details of why, I have no
idea. Nobody asked me. As a matter of fact, the
decision was made while I was out of the country.
And I frankly didn't know on a personal basis what
it might mean or be perceived as I came back and was
told that this reorganization was imminent and in
process.
Of course, it's a matter of history what
happened. And I just,
Having made the mill commitment and
the professional commitment to try to grab hold of
the range of keys and try to build a research
property
that would make a difference for this state.
Decided to hang on to the range and see if I could
keep the wagon between the ditches. But there were
some clear ditches and some big potholes. You
know, I'd turn a curve and see if there would be one.
I hadn't had a slightest idea it was going to be
there or why it was there. It would be a good shot.
Yeah, yeah. Was the period when you acted as vice
director, was that helpful to you? Sure,
absolutely. And absolutely necessary. It's
a complex... growing organization that's a now
because of the pressures on the state part of it was
at that time part of a very complex and rapidly
growing system of critical importance to this
thing this land grant university system in
my opinion is and should be the brightest star
in the crown of Texas. Was this during the Texas
2000 Commission? Well, no, not at that time. That
happened during
Governor Clements' period as governor.
But that did happen and did come to a final form
during the period while I've been the director of
teams, and I got very actively involved in that.
Did the original findings of the commission shock
teams as to how little it was actually known about
it? Well, it didn't shock teams, I would think. One
of the things I
was told
and encouraged to do as the time gets past and
something like this, usually the guy who had run it
will drop a pearl or two for the guy who's taking it
over. But I was encouraged that all of us at the time
to try to make these more visible in the state. So
that, first of all, it would be clear to the
entities, the citizens of the state, how to access
TEAS. And it would also give TEAS greater
visibility so that the legislators, the
leadership of Texas would understand its value
and potential. And it's helping gain the support
it needed in order to do the job it can do.
So because I had been told that that was, in almost
everybody's opinion, something that needed now
to be done for this agency, I wasn't shocked in the
Texas 2000 study to know or to learn that Tease was
not known or understood. Tease is not known or
understood in Texas A&M University. Still isn't.
It's known now. It's become very visible, very
active, and it's grown at an incredible pace. But
it's not understood. It's perceived
often to be things it isn't. And typically, when
things are not understood, they're feared. It's a
human nature. Is that one of your major programs is
trying to get peace understood within the system
itself? Absolutely, sure. All people that have a
need or an opportunity or a desire to work through
teens. My philosophy is, as an educator, the more
everybody knows, the better off we all are. And a
difference of opinion, in my opinion, is healthy,
as long as we keep it in perspective and keep it
constructive. So no, I was not surprised. But when
I saw the recommendations, the first report of the
Texas 2000, I didn't sit around and wring my hand. I
went immediately to the person who was
responsible for having written that and told
them that, first of all, I didn't appreciate it.
Secondly, the reason I didn't appreciate it was
because it was incorrect. And thirdly, I'd be
happy to share with him why I felt that way and get
his opinion. Did that commission really make it
easier for you to become this way? Has it brought it
out in the open? I think that that helped. Because
when I said those things to Vic Arnold, actually,
who was heading up the Texas 2000 Commission, at
least the working
end of it. And I mean
by that, he was the person who had the
responsibility, literally, for the staff that
was pulling all the staff together. He was
surprised. I just challenged him. He was
receptive. And I said, all right, I'd like to hear.
So I immediately set up a meeting with him the very
next week. Went to Austin. And we sat down, and he
told me some of the thoughts he had about how to
build a program, define a program, get it funded,
to try to help create new businesses for the state.
We had NTs already begun to work on the
Institute for Ventures and Technology earlier.
We didn't have that name for it at that time. We were
still calling it the Small Business Development
Center or something like that. But we had the
concept well defined. We already had the proposal
in the NSF. And we were moving. We weren't talking
about an idea that we were thinking about getting
ready to define. We already were moving on. And in a
meeting of the 2,000 that identified, I think,
seven areas of critical importance to the state,
one of which was research and development, and in a
meeting at LTV, I think one of theirs, of that R&D
committee. I was then invited the following week
to come make the presentation of this idea and how
it would function and how it would be funded
through the governor's R&D committee. And we were
ready. And I took Bill Muse, who was then the dean of
the College of Business, who had
been working from the outset in the proposal
preparation. And he and I and Jane Armstrong, who
was then my assistant, went to that meeting and
laid out the proposal. And there was just a
dramatic turnaround. in the concept of how the
state might proceed
to accomplish that. And I think that gave T's
visibility. What about the
N, MCC?
Well, Of course, you know what NCC is and how it came
about. Well, some of them. But briefly, it was an
idea of one man, as most ideas are. Although it's
hard to have a unique one. You can often then find
out who the other men were that might have had it
about the same time. But Bill Lawrence, who's the
Chairman of the Board of the Controlled Danical
Commission, had been pushing a concept like the
NMCC.